Calling in tactical air support and assisting the
forward air controller who was airborne also in
his little bird dog airplane and getting fire in on
the enemy
and at the same time I'd call for Smokey Smokey is a
fella in an old DC-3 that comes in and drops flares
for you. So you can see it light up the area. We're
talking about 2 or 3 in the morning? Oh, we're
talking about now it's 2 o'clock, 3 o'clock, 4
o'clock. So we're beating them back pretty
heavily. and have just kept them out of that troop
of cavalry. I mean, 1900 against 125, you know,
that's a hellacious odds. So
we had been doing very well. And in the meantime,
the battalion commander A lieutenant colonel who
had come up from the ranks and was out of World War
II, believe it or not he was a private in the
reconnaissance troop of the 1st Division during
World War II as a private about 16 years old and now
here he is a lieutenant colonel here commanding
the 5th Cavalry of the 9th Division which is a
reconnaissance squadron. And here they are
attached to the big red one. And he said he wanted to
get in the fire base with the captain. I said, well,
you're going to have to fight your way in there and
I'll help you get in. He said, I'm going to take two
of my track vehicles, M-113 personnel carrier
track vehicles, and said, we're going to shoot our
way through. And I said, Fine, because I said if his
radio goes down I need all the radios that I can get
in there that I can talk to so that we can direct this
battle properly. One of his vehicles was knocked
out and he got out under fire and backed up his van.
His radio operator was killed and the commander of
that vehicle was killed. He got out himself
personally and and hooked up his vehicle, another
113 personnel carrier, command type vehicle, to
the vehicle that had been destroyed and drug it
into the perimeter.
He won, he was presented Distinguished Service
Cross for this action, To make a long story short, I
knew that it was 4 o'clock in the morning, 4.30 in
the morning, and I alerted everyone to the fact
that I felt that that regiment, their losses being
very heavy, would attempt another assault at
about 5 o'clock in the morning. And that I wanted
the... The... In secure, with secure
communications, I talked to the commander on the
ground, now Lieutenant Colonel Haphazard, and I
said, I want at 5.15
or earlier, depending on when this last and final
assault comes, I want every vehicle turn every
vehicle that's capable of turning on its lights to
turn them on as soon as that assault occurs and uh
this is kind of like exposing yourself to
everything in their eyes they said oh i said that's
exactly the way i want it I had 15 sorties of TAC air
stacked up, 15 airplanes stacked up waiting. I had
the artillery all cocked and primed although they
were still shooting at designated targets.
Well sure enough at about 0510 in the morning a fire
began to come in, the intensity of the fire began to
come in. At 0515 the commies got up and started to
move and I started peeling off those fighter
bombers with CBU and napalm and we murdered them.
And when it was all over with and daylight came we
had three dead cavalrymen and eleven slightly
wounded. Now there's no 125 of anybody's soldiers
in anybody's army in the world can stand up to 1,900
soldiers
and only lose three men and 11 wounded Five hours
plus of battle, of intense battle, except the
United States Army soldiers supported by the
United States Air Force. That's the only 125
little guys in the world that can do that sort of
job. And the next day the enemy, how many they drug
off, we don't know, but they left 499 dead on the
battlefield, which is a sacred sin and a dishonor
to the bastards.
But that's what firepower will do. Properly
directed
by somebody that knows what the hell he's doing.
And the continuous firepower on the enemy Then on
April 1st at a place called AP, A-P,
capital G-U,
the 26th Infantry was commanded by Lieutenant
Colonel Alexander M. Haig, Jr. And they were air
assaulted in the afternoon of March 31st.
into this area, which was at one time some 20 years
ago before the communists uprooted the civilian
populace there and murdered them all and took over
the country, was a small village. But the
communists had killed everyone and taken over
themselves. And this was about two miles from the
Cambodian border in Tainan province. And we were
operating in that area. And Lieutenant Colonel
Haig had air assaulted into this area with the 1st
Battalion of 26th Infantry in the afternoon and
immediately sent out his reconnaissance
platoon commanded by Lieutenant Hill to do the
necessary scout and reconnaissance while his
battalion dug in. They were going to spend the
night there and attack from there the next day.
along the Cambodian border.
The reconnaissance platoon had not moved more
than 300 meters from the perimeter that
the former Secretary of State, Alexander Haig,
then Lieutenant Colonel, was digging himself in
on the perimeter. When Lieutenant Hill bumped
into a heavy formation, he was killed along with
two others. And Lieutenant Colonel Haig in a H-13
Bell helicopter, which is almost nothing, was up
over those men, received intense fire, was shot
down, and helicopter fell. and he and the pilot got
away from him before he burned and he proceeded on
foot
to get with that recon platoon and remove the
wounded and his dead Lieutenant Hill. As a result
of that action that afternoon and I personally
observed it and was there I recommended
Lieutenant Colonel Haig for the Distinguished
Flying Cross and
for his ground actions and that afternoon and the
next day the Distinguished Service Cross. The
night was settling and wore on and at 0530 in the
morning his battalion was hit by 400 plus rounds of
heavy mortar fire.
I immediately went to the scene
in my command helicopter
um
believing in firepower the artillery had been
placed that day and in their early hours of the
evening to fire and support the division's
operations the next day along the cambodian
border
william immediately, Colonel Haig immediately
called for artillery fire for which he received
instantaneously and for tactical air support. At
537 the first, and this is significant now, at 537
in the morning the first tactical air arrived.
Remember the mortars came in at 5.30. That's very
significant because most people don't know how to
use tactical air. I'd say one out of every 400,000
in the Army, that means today they listen to people
that know how to use tactical air. I'm talking
about officer or enlisted men. That's every
experience. Yeah, they don't know anything about
it. Why is that? They've never experienced it, and
they don't know how to set it up. You see, if you want
to attack air early in the target, what you do is
pre-plan the missions to be delivered sometime on
your targets. You pre-plan missions during the
night at the point in time in which you expect the
enemy to attack. I always expected the enemy to
attack at 5 30 in the morning and at midnight so I'd
say to the Air Force I want my pre-planned missions
on targets on known targets that I want bombed
during the night and struck during the night
I want those missions those sorties to be
delivered From 11.30 until 1 o'clock and from 5
o'clock until 6 o'clock in the morning.
Okay, they're up. They're loaded. They're in the
process of delivering them. Then when the enemy
strikes, you divert those that are airborne and go
there immediately. Instead of waiting to wake up a
pilot and to load up a ship and wait for that and
while you get eat up by the enemy. So it all depends
on how professional you are about how you get on
with getting your job done. Well, that's the way to
do it. And that's the way it was done in the First
Division. So
between 0537 and 958
the next morning when the enemy decided they
didn't want anymore,
We set probably a world record. We put in 133
sorties attack air and fired more than 15,000
rounds of 155, 105, and 8-inch artillery on the 271
Regiment and the 1st Battalion of the 1st NVA
Regiment, which totaled about 2,800, 2,900
strength. Again,
28, 2900 against about 500 was the strength of
Colonel Hegg's battalion, except they
concentrated only against B and C Company. A
Company, we took its ammunition and gave it to B and
C Company during the night. Colonel Hegg did that.
A company wasn't even scratched by this entire
reinforced regiment. And I want to tell you that we
tore those people to shreds. They left more than
600 dead.
And we had 37 killed and wounded.
And as a result of that action, and what he had done
before, I recommended
Lieutenant Colonel Haig for the Distinguished
Service Cross, which he has.
Again, a phenomenal action of American soldier
and know-how against extreme unheard of odds.
six to one. And when you start looking at how many
was in action, it's probably ten to one because
they only hit elements of two of the companies in
the perimeter, two of the rifle companies in the
perimeter.
There are two examples of Now, the Vice Chief of
Staff of the Army, General Bruce Palmer, who was in
Vietnam at the time as a Lieutenant General, he
felt that the action of General Haig and his, in
that particular battle, would probably go down in
history as the greatest battle at up to that point
in time in Vietnam. No kidding? Yes, it was really a
significant showing on the part of American
know-how against the Communists. And again, as an
action of the First Division.
I went home in the late May.
The brigade commander was wounded that day.
who the commander in which Colonel Hegg's 26th
Infantry was assigned to. And after that battle,
Colonel Hegg became their brigade commander.
From there he was selected to go to West Point as a
regimental tactical, regimental tactical
commander with one regiment of cadets.
I came back to the United States and we were having
severe problems with the Congress on the bad
results of the M16 rifle, on the poor results of the
multi-fuel engine There's some 11,000
multi-fuel engines made by Continental Motors in
Muskegon that had performed so poorly that 11,000
of them are laying over there in Korea. So that's
bad. Congress is raising hell and rightfully so
about this. And then there was a push to get a light
vehicle called the M551 with a Sheridan missile
system. General Westmoreland was hollering for
it. Chief of Staff of the Army said, I'd like for you
to go to Aberdeen Proving Grounds and put some
combat experience into testing of this equipment
because I'm tired of the Congress beating us to
death on the inadequacies of this equipment. and
said, I feel it's because we're not testing it
properly before we go to the field. I rendered a
report within six months to the Chief of Staff of
the Army that it was not the testing,
but it was the insistence
on getting the stuff into the field before it was
ready as a result of a Vietnamese conflict. And I
said, leave the people alone and let them test it
properly before you introduce it into the field.
At about that time, Detroit blew up. Washington,
D.C. blew up. Newark, New Jersey blew up.
Disaster. Democracy creating anarchy. Anarchy
within democracy. So you question, is democracy
the right way to go or not? We created it. anarchy
here. You're destroying the damn country. You're
blowing up banks, churches, public buildings,
schools. What in the hell is democracy doing for
the American people? This is displaying the world
and particularly the communists who are
exploiting it that democracy is a total damn
failure.
So
In such instances, as you know, under the
Constitution, it provided national guard for the
state's forces and militia to assist the governor
in maintaining internal law and order. And in each
instance, there were total failures. Failure in
Detroit, failure in Newark, failure in
Washington, D.C. And regular forces, active duty
forces, were called in. help stop those riotous
situations and this is a embarrassment to the
United States people in the throughout the world
shining example of what must not happen total
anarchy
so
President Lyndon B. Johnson
asked the former governor of Ohio
to set up a commission to look at what in the name of
God is going on in this country. I can't remember
the name of the former governor. He was one that had
some strength. some criticism up there you know
how he's doing business and Kinder I can't
remember now what his name was but anyway it
finally boiled down to me being pulled out of
pulled out of Aberdeen Proving Grounds testing
business by the chief of staff the army to go do a
thorough investigation of the failures in
Detroit, Washington, D.C., and Newark of the
National Guard. No kidding. Why do you think that
they picked you? Because of your experience with
the reserves before? I guess so. So it's kind of
more or less a chief of staff, the Army
presidential, president, joint selectee to go do
this.
So I put together a team of about 20 officers,
took a special mission aircraft, and between July
and February of the next year, I visited 90% of the
states,
and particularly concentrated on what had gone
wrong in Detroit, and what had gone wrong in
Newark, and what had gone wrong in Washington,
D.C.
And it came up with what was known as the
Hollingsworth
Report,
which was very, very critical of the inadequacies
of the Reserve and the National Guard. Do you have a
copy of that? All the copies I have of those are in
Washington, D.C. What did it say? It said that we
don't have, if we can't control internal security
of our country, how do you expect these forces in a
time of war to be of any help to the external threat
if you can't even handle the internal threat? It
sent forth some 50 recommendations to get
ourselves sorted out, of which I think there was
final approval on about 48 of them. Really? Yes.
Establish proper schooling, clean out people,
get rid of the dead wood,
properly training, properly equipping people,
primarily to reinforce
and select and train leadership in the National
Guard and I did not exclude the Reserves because I
took advantage of the fact to look at the Reserves
also because they were just as lousy as the Guard in
many instances. Totally. You don't have to look at
the Cuban call up and then see how lousy that is. And
then to go have your country collapse and the guard
and the states and governors are calling for
active duty forces, 82nd Airborne and others to
come put the thing in order. You don't have to be a
blind man. You don't have to A third grader can see
that. Sure. That you've got disaster on your
hands. And I think that report went a long ways to
alerting everybody to the fact that you don't have
anything out here. You're just fooling yourself.
Again, this is a leniency. They have fluency. The
lack of discipline amongst the people.
And we have some real failures. We have some real
failings amongst ourselves, you know. And
unfortunately in our country, we can't recognize
our own inadequacies.
Oftentimes. Most of the times you cannot. And then
when you do, you don't want to accept it.
This is the reason why one of the most worrisome
things to me in
the defense of this country is whether the
political elements from the President to the
Congress will accept the cold hard facts of a
communist threat and do something about it or
they'll try to pass information off so that they
don't believe it and then this country get the
biggest shock of its life and lose the whole damn
show because of politics and weak leadership, not
willing to accept the cold, hard facts of life. So,
you know, to have a good intelligence collecting
capability is one thing, and to disseminate it to
the right people is another thing. But then to get
those that it's disseminated to to face the real
world and take some action, where it needs to be,
that's another thing.
And it takes a lot of backbone. It takes a lot of
courage. It takes a lot of know-how. It takes a lot
of professionalism to stand up and say, by God, I
was wrong. We did not properly support our
military here with what they need to do the job
with. And now the enemy is just kind of driving us up
the damn wall.
You see? And this is the most worrisome thing. It's
like, for example, I'll give you a good example of
what I'm talking about. The
most warning that you'll probably receive
of attacks against NATO in Central Europe by the
Warsaw Pact will probably be 48 hours.
Now, in order to prepare yourself for that sort of
attack, it costs a lot of money. Mr. Reagan is the
only one that's been able to face up to that because
it costs a lot of money to prepare yourself against
that. When you look at the real world, you're only
going to have about 24 hours because in the NATO
alliance, 15 member nations have to get together
and spend 24 hours making a determination on
whether or not these indicators that there will be
an attack in 48 hours are really true or not. And
then you leave yourself only 24 hours to respond.
And it takes us three days or more to reinforce our
air capability, and the Army doesn't get any
assistance for ten days or more, because there's
no air left. And when I took command of the Warsaw
Pact in 1976, in the Hollingsworth study now of
NATO, for the Secretary of the Army and for the
Chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee,
a joint requirement from those two to me. I took the
Ruhr in 72 hours.
And where is the United States in 72 hours? They
don't even have all their air over there yet.
And when you take the Ruhr in Germany, You've got
the heart of it, it's all over with. Soviets
playing around with marching to Antwerp in seven
days. I'd relieve the damn Soviet commander that
took that long to get to Antwerp. Hell, he couldn't
work for me, but he's too damn slow. You can do it, I
can take their forces and do it quicker than that.
So if I can do that, you've got to give them credit
for being able to do it. So then you now get moving on
what's necessary in order to avoid that sort of
thing. What did President Johnson say about your
report, Hollinsworth report? Oh, you mean we're
going back now? We're going back to the 1968
period? I don't know what he said. Did he read it?
The National Security Council was briefed. And
whether they briefed the president or not, I don't
know. I imagine that they did.
Because he was an instigator of it coming off. And
he was quite right. If the National Guard can't do
this thing, maybe we need more active duty forces.
Maybe we don't need a National Guard. But that's
not the case. We do need a National Guard. for
internal security and to support the governor and
the state police and the state municipal police in
the case of disasters of any kind. And secondly, to
be prepared to accept a role in support of the
active forces wherever they need to be in the
world. They've got to play an important role. But
by God, they've got to be prepared and ready to do
something. Did you meet LBJ? Oh, yes. When? back in
1953, back when he was in the Senate. Oh yeah, many
times. He and Lady Bird both. What was your
impression? First-class politician of the
highest order
and who got things done through the political
process. Very effective.
No question about it. Sam Rayburn was even far
superior to him, who was Speaker of the House.
Now that,
Rayburn Johnson was the old political regime in
which Tip O'Neill is still one of.
And it's kind of dying out to a degree.
isn't so much as it used to be. They don't have so
much power as they used to have. Now, at the end of
this report then you were sent to Fort Jackson in
South Carolina. Yes, I was called in and said we
have a major general down there training
infantrymen for combat who is practicing
on-the-job retirement. What a way to put it, on the
job retirement. Yeah. And go down there as a deputy
and prepared to take over this thing. That's all
there was to it. And I did that.
On the job retirement. That's pretty good. So he
was sleeping. Yes, very much so. And it was at... at
that time that you got your second star. Yes,
that's right. My second star, and
I then went to take over U.S. Army Alaska. Right,
but at Port Jackson were you training men for
Vietnam? Yes, during my time there I trained a
quarter of a million, about, we trained about as I
think about 125 to 150,000 a year, combat
infantrymen. And
I had a chance to study all these people, some of
them were volunteers, most of them were draftees.
And I had some very revealing, some very
interesting facts came from that and testing and
watching these men and taking necessary
information and analyzing and looking at where
people had been and what they were and so on and so
forth. And I found a very disturbing situation
that 22% of the high school diploma holders could
not pass a fifth grade reading and writing. 22%
of the high school diploma holders, graduates,
that I received could not pass a fifth grade
reading and writing and arithmetic. And I thought
this is the damnedest indictment against our
public and private educational system again it
led me to say what in the name of God is this country
doing to itself
and I learned a new term for the first time social
promotion
if the guy's a total failure in the first grade
after he's been there maybe the second time if
you've got guts enough to do it give him a social
promotion to the second grade because he's
getting too big in size for or she for the rest of the
little fellas and you just go ahead and do that
right through on out the 12th grade and I think this
is the most damaging thing to the American system.
It's kind of like
Governor Clements here trying to focus in on
getting our education system to stand up with some
guts
and teach these people how to read and write our
youth. And I think they deserve that. I found a
percentage of one-year and two-year college
students, a small percentage of those who could
not pass the fifth grade comprehensive of
one-year and two-year college levels at that
time. When you were in command there, this was
right after the Tet Offensive in January of 1968,
and after that time there was a growing distaste
for the war in Vietnam, and of course we were still
building our number of our troop strength, and it
didn't come to half our 500 60,000 until 1969 so we
were still building and so we were drafting more. A
lot has been said about the quality of these men who
were going over to Vietnam and we're going to talk
about the quality of the soldiers that you had in
Vietnam later but right now what about the quality
of these recruits, these draftees? These
draftees were a cross-section of the eastern part
of the United States out to include Ohio, West
Virginia, Tennessee, and generally speaking the
ones I had at Fort Jackson with some exceptions
where you'd have an overflow in some other place.
Most of them were from east of the Mississippi,
although you would get some maybe a hundred or two
hundred from here from west of the Mississippi,
but most of them were east of the Mississippi. I
thought they represented a cross-section of the
United States. I thought that
I was getting more of the communist inspired types
than I would expect as my share. As a matter of fact,
I did have five commies try to create a disturbance
one evening in one of my brigades. Tell me about it.
And I locked them up. I threw them in jail. Well,
tell me about it. What did they try to do, more
specifically? Well, they tried to, they were in
the— Did they admit that they were commies? Oh,
they were Associates Worker Party guys and also
mousy tongue types out of Chicago. They
were heavily supported by the ACLU and
the Communist parties in the United States out of
Washington, D.C. Marcus Lennon group out of
Washington, D.C. Mousetongues out of Chicago,
the same types that created the disturbance at
Kent State and were all buried back in Chicago when
that one blew, remember? Well, I had put the word
out that I wouldn't tolerate any of this crap,
communist crap. It wasn't going to happen, by God,
and that No Jane Fondas are going to visit. She had
been on several Army posts and tried to get along,
but I said, in one Army post, that the
Communist-inspired elements are not going to
interfere with. And I said, there isn't any damn
question about this. And I wanted it to be known
publicly, and it wasn't known publicly. Well,
somehow or another, five of these guys showed up
there Were they recruits or were they just? They
were in advance training. They had created
disturbances at other places and instead of the
Army taking action, you had some weak goddamn
commanders as you have in all walks of life that
were more interested in themselves and weren't
interested in creating any, taking any action to
do something, you know, when action was required.
So they keep passing these jokers along. Instead
of killing the goddamn snake, you just chase him
off out of this bunch of woods into another one, you
see. I like to kill a son of a bitch when you've got a
goddamn rattlesnake. Don't chase him over
another guy's yard. So they chased about five of
them into my yard, and that's where they made their
damn mistake. What'd they do? Well, they tried to
create a revolt and revolution one evening down
between the two barracks out making speeches, you
know, about about how bad Vietnam was and this is
not a democracy and you got your rights and this
that and the other and all this horseshit and so I
just sent the MPs down and I said lock those
communist bastards up which they did and then I
started action to court-martial them and press
got in the act. ACLU got in the act.
Their ACLU lawyer, we were denying their rights
and so on and so forth. Make a long story short, I
court-martialed them in a closed court and the New
York Times came down and wanting to attend the
trial. I said, apparently you people are stupider
than I think you are, or maybe you're in the same
category as these fellows, but since you can't
read and write, maybe I better tell you that I said
the court was closed. And they're not going to be
tried in a newspaper. They're going to be tried in a
legal court. That's what I told the goddamn
reporter from New York Times. He went back to
Washington and went up to see a guy named Laird, who
was a politician, Secretary of Defense. And Laird
sent him down to the PIO, the Public Information
Officer, Assistant Secretary, I think his name
was Ross. And then Ross, he calls the Army, and then
the Army...